---
layout: post
comments: true
tags: bipolar suicide depression
title: Local Minimum
---
I saw someone on science Twitter recently asking their colleagues: "What have you sacrificed to have a scientific career?" It got me thinking. Sometimes I feel as if I ended up sacrificing a scientific career for the possibility of a future one but that's not true at all. Sacrifice implies a choice in the matter and I had none.  

Five years ago last month, my first go at a scientific career officially ended. Really, though, it had ended four months prior on New Year's Day 2013, when, accompanied by my husband, I walked into to the ER at Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring, MD and informed the receiving nurse that I was going to kill myself. I had never been so certain of anything before.

Suicidality for me is a long, protracted negotiation with Death itself. Sometimes, when I'm deep into a depressive state, I actually imagine myself in some cavernous, dimly lit room seated across a wide table from the Grim Reaper himself, bargaining. He always drives a hard one. He only has one thing to offer but it is something that, in those most vulnerable moments of emotional anguish, is irresistible. I can't describe the pain of depression with words other than "pain" itself, but he proffers relief from it at last. The terrible tranquility of a mind finally silenced. Depression warps and distorts everything so much that suicide starts to *make sense* to me. And far from being the 'selfish way out' that it's often seen as by the unafflicted, it convinces me that my loved ones would be better off in the long run without me in their lives. Removing myself is the most benevolent action I can think of. It's compelling. And resisting the temptation is *hard*. Many of us run out of strength. Ultimately, I got tired of fighting, and I lost hold of the slender tendril connecting me to the world of rational actors. I saw myself ending my own life with the same clarity with which you're reading these words right now. I witnessed the whole bloody thing in my kitchen on New Year's Day, 2013, like a vision from the future or a scene from a movie. (I've since learned that [hallucinations like this are not unheard of in bipolar sufferers](https://www.bphope.com/blog/bipolar-disorder-psychosis-sneaky-sneaky-hallucinations/) like myself).

What led me to this point was a collection of errors and tough times. It's a classic mistake made by bipolar sufferers to go off medication. It's estimated that as many as [60% of us are thought to be not adherent or only partially adherent](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3691269/) to prescribed pharmacological treatment. There are almost as many reasons patients discontinue treatment as there are bipolar sufferers themselves but mine was - at least initially - legitimate. After my first "official" diagnosis in 2008, I was put on Lamictal, an anti-convulsant mood stabilizer. It was a good drug for me, and one of many that I would be on as we tried to get a handle on my mood and psychosis symptoms. I began having trouble with some serious side effects and had to come off it in December 2011. I never replaced it with another mood stabilizer. I would eventually go off the anti-psychotics I was prescribed as well. I stopped talking to my doctor and it was off to the races for my brain. The major life-things that happened in early 2012 (including the end my first marriage) only added nitrous to the combustion engine in my skull.

I'd be lying if I didn't say mania wasn't at least a little bit of a good time (well, for me at least). It feels like having superpowers so you can see how the delusional stretch to *actually* having them isn't such a hard one to make. The thoughts and ideas come so fast. It's exhilarating and chaotic but I feel on top of it all. Like I'm conducting an internal orchestra in the performance of some magnum opus. Nothing has bad consequences and I am right and just and good in all my actions. Of course, the truth doesn't bear that out. After being awake for four days, I'm trying to outrun all sorts of perceived demons. When I finally sleep, the crash comes hard and swift. Falling out of the sky and plunging into the ocean every 3-4 weeks, the boom-bust cycles I had throughout 2012 had a steadily increasing amplitude and likewise my behavior became more and more erratic. This disease has a way of unraveling one's life without them even noticing. I didn't understand at the time, but my behavior distanced me from family and loved ones. It put a ridiculous burden on my mentors and coworkers while I was a postdoc. They no doubt saw their colleague become increasingly disturbed and derelict in her duties (I'm so sorry that I let you down, everyone). Worst of all, it did something I would have never let happen had I been healthy; it put my ability to do science for a living in jeopardy.  

There's a distinct sense of actual falling when caught in the grip of uncontrolled mental illness. I certainly had moments of frightening clarity during 2012 that were just long enough for a single "This is *fucked*" thought to register. Some part of me inside was screaming in horror the entire time, watching helplessly as things fell apart. There's a school of philosophy out there that would have me label New Year's Day 2013 as a personal "rock-bottom" and at the time it certainly felt like that. But now, with the entire thing 5 years behind me, I feel differently about it. The blow of hitting that low point was enormous, but the pain of it obscured something strangely beautiful that would only become clearer with time and education and treatment. It was less about hitting bottom than it was about stopping falling. "The bottom", having always had this shameful, terrible connotation to me, was actually a place of mercy. Because had I kept falling, I would be dead. The madness had to stop and that meant I had to stop. I had to stop everything. We moved back to my native western Pennsylvania and I took a job that allowed me to work from home as I continued to recover. That job introduced me to analytics and how statistical modeling is used to solve all kinds of problems. I decided to go for a Master's degree in predictive analytics to add to my knowledge and also as part of my recovery (learning is therapy!). And, now, thanks to online education and open source data, I'm doing actual science again. There were ways out of that deep low even if I didn't see them at the time.

I am stronger for having been through the experience which makes me better prepared for the next time. I've litigated everything that happened over and over (the "credit assignment problem" in mental illness) and finally let go, knowing that I have but one responsibility and that's to take care of myself and manage my illness. I'm so thankful for the future because it almost didn't happen. Like any of the challenges any of us have in our lives, mine is an incredible teacher and I'm grateful for the empathy, purpose, and understanding that bipolar disorder has taught me so far. It's strange maybe, but I think I'm a much better human because of this illness. I understand fully now why it's important to treat everyone as if they're locked in negotiations with Death, or trying to work around disruptions by things only they can see or hear, or suffering unbelievable, unseen physical or mental pain. Somewhere, there's an opportunity for me to use it all (and the neuroscience and the data science) to help make it a little bit easier for folks struggling with severe mental illness to manage things. I'm not certain what that looks like exactly but I'm excited about it.
